So you've chosen your civilisation, your site, and your embark loadout.
You've arrived, and are ready to strike the earth. What should you do
first?

Get the hell inside.

Well, first *make* an inside, then get the hell in there. Dwarf Fortress
is one of those games where anything can happen, and it has no concept
of “fair”. It's perfectly possible to arrive at a nice-looking location
and for all your dwarves to be almost immediately slaughtered. The
danger could be wild beasts, bandits, the undead, hostile civilisations,
monsters, you name it. Fortunately, none of them can dig.

Checking for Threats
--------------------

So the first order of business is to pause the game (you *have* paused,
haven't you? Maybe go re-read the 
[Quickstart Guide](http://dwarffortresswiki.org/index.php/Quickstart_Guide "wikilink")…) and check your surroundings for
threats (press `u` for units). On a nice embark, there should be nothing 
more exciting than some fairly mundane wildlife.

- ⇨ Pause the game!

If, however, there's anything more interesting on the prowl, you have
three options. The first is to proceed with your fortress, but do it
*really fast* and pray you get everything underground before the threat
spots you. The second, if it looks *particularly* interesting, is to run
like hell to the opposite edge of the map and do the same, which is
awkward (your supplies are all back in the middle of the map, and you'll
struggle without them), but can save your bacon. Make sure you take your
picks, at least, or you'll be well and truly buggered. The third is
all-out attack. Check what the wiki says about this particular threat
and decide accordingly. If you get sealed in without supplies, you may
have to make a race down to the caverns for food, and then find a way to
kill the threat because you won't get very far without your anvil or
access to the surface to trade for an anvil. There's some general
suggestions at the end of this page. 

However, assuming all goes well, it's time indeed to strike the earth...
