Wood industry
-------------

The first step in setting up a wood industry will be fairly obvious
should you tax your faculties even a little: cutting down trees. For
starters, you'll want to cut down at least thirty or so. With any luck,
you should find these within a reasonable distance of your fortress
entrance, but may have to send your woodcutter further afield. In fact,
you may wish to spare any fruit or nut trees close to the fortress
entrance, since this makes your herbalist's job quicker and safer.
Obviously this makes woodcutting one of the most dangerous professions
in the fort, so make it a habit to frequently monitor the (U)nits menu
for threats.

When designating, set the designation as priority 6 (higher numbers are
actually *lower* priority jobs). Your woodcutter is also your carpenter,
and at the default priority of 4 will tend to spend all their time
felling the trees you designated and none actually using the products.
This way, when there are logs available and carpentry jobs to be done,
they will *get* done. You can therefore designate a fairly large area of
trees all at once - say, a 66 x 66 square centred on your fortress
entrance - and when you've built up a fair stockpile of wood just queue
up your carpentry needs. Your woodcutter should then switch over to
carpentry jobs until the jobs or the logs run out.

What carpentry jobs? Well, right now, you'll need a few barrels,
wheelbarrows, beds and (plenty of) storage bins. Soon, however, you'll
want buckets, splints and crutches, and cages; then there's charcoal and
ash, siege equipment, pump components and more…

Unlike stone, there are [not
many](http://dwarffortresswiki.org/index.php/Wood_industry#_A_Log_Is_A_Log "wikilink") special kinds of wood
you need to worry about at this point in the game. One consideration is
to reserve the unusually dense bloodthorn and glumprong for ballista
arrows, so disable those from the wood stockpile. And nether-cap wood
has the strange property of maintaining a constant freezing temperature
(exactly ten thousand degrees [Urist](http://dwarffortresswiki.org/index.php/Temperature "wikilink")), which
obviously can be helpful around magma or for fire-proofing your booze
stockpile, but there's no shortage of other magma-safe materials so I
wouldn't bother disabling this. For now, in any case, you're unlikely to
have access to these woods, since glumprongs grow in evil areas (and you
didn't embark there, *right*?) an the other two are found in the deep
caverns.

That said, you may be lucky enough to have access to one of the three
[particularly low-density species](http://dwarffortresswiki.org/index.php/Wood "wikilink"); feather tree,
candlenut, or kapok. If so, it's probably worth setting up a dedicated
stockpile and workshop (drawing on the lessons from setting up the stone
industry) to manufacture bins and barrels and take advantage of the
increased hauling speeds. Some more common trees like willow are about
65 % of the average weight of other woods, but to my mind that's not
worth setting up a whole separate facility. There's one caveat: usually
you can get lightweight logs by trade (especially feather tree wood from
the elves), so if you really want maximum hauling efficiency then you
can set up a lightweight wood facility now and make containers as and
when it becomes available, trading away your heavier containers as you
generate enough surplus.

### Wood industry layout

Assuming you're not setting up a separate lightweight-wood facility, the
wood industry layout should be very similar to the stone industry. Make
a large wood stockpile in one of the empty 11 x 11 rooms in the middle
layer (it doesn't matter which one). Set it to refuse glumprong and
bloodthorn as well as any of the other woods you wish to reserve for
special uses as described above. Remove four equally-spaced 3 x 3
cutouts around the edges, one tile from the walls, same as you did with
the stone stockpile, and in those spaces build a wood furnace, a
carpenter's workshop, a craftsdwarf's workshop, and a bowyer's workshop
(it doesn't really matter where, but the carpenter's workshop and wood
furnace are going to be used the most so maybe place these closer to the
entrance). Note that the wood furnace and bowyer's workshops won't
actually get constructed until you have some dwarves with those labours
enable. All in good time. Set the wood stockpile to give to each of
these four workshops.

Some players will recommend setting up a feeder stockpile for wood near
your timber-felling area, but personally I don't see the point. Your
dwarves will schlep all the way outside to pick up a log, travel a few
tiles to drop it in a stockpile and then… what, go all the way back
inside, empty-handed, to find another job? Seems less efficient to me.
However, any future stockpiles within the fortress (such as near the
siege workshop) should be set to “take from links only” and take from
this wood stockpile (except for the “reserved” uses discussed above,
which obviously should have their own supply chains).

For right now, your main wood product is going to be storage bins and
cages, but eventually you'll need to start cranking out charcoal to
support the metal industry. Along the way, there are plenty of other
items needed in small to moderate batches, so we'll make space for those
as well. Again, we have the two large rooms for stockpiles surrounded by
eight medium rooms, and four medium rooms in the hallway. With that in
mind, here's the recommended setup:

Large rooms:

-   f1: Bins
-   a1: Cages (animal stockpile)

Medium rooms:

-   w1: Crossbows (weapon/trap components stockpile)
-   g1: Splints & crutches
-   g2: Wheelbarrows & stepladders
-   r1: Shields (armour stockpile)
-   w2: Corkscrews
-   f2: Pipe sections
-   f3: Beds
-   b1: Ash bars (bars and blocks stockpile)

Medium rooms off the hallway:

-   b2: Charcoal bars
-   f4: Barrels
-   f5: Buckets
-   Nil (dormitory)

As before, make sure you disallow all item and material types except the
ones you want (for wheelbarrows and stepladders, enable “tools”; to keep
these separate from other tool stockpiles, we won't be making any other
wooden tools). Additionally, for the animal stockpile, disallow all
creatures and empty animal traps (so only empty cages are allowed).
We'll make separate stockpiles for caged creatures and animal traps
later.

### Priorities for wood usage

Once the industry is laid out, what should your carpenter be producing?
First, make three wheelbarrows for the stone stockpile, to ensure your
stone industry hums along. You don't have to assign them to a stockpile
or anything - once they become available, your dwarves will haul them to
the stone stockpile and start using them. You can either remember to
make more wheelbarrows every time you make a new stone stockpile
(unreliable), or periodically check your supply of wooden tools
(wheelbarrows and stepladders, in the finished goods stockpile listed
above) to make sure you have a few in surplus.

Next, make about twelve beds (yes, that's a few extra) so your
princess-and-pea dwarves don't get precious about having to sleep on the
floor. Install (build) them along the walls of the unused medium room
off the corridor, and then use the building menu (q) to create a
dormitory. Your dwarves will sleep here until they get bedrooms of their
very own, and even then it can come in handy to accommodate large
migrant waves when you haven't prepared enough bedrooms in advance.

Next, queue up about ten barrels. Stone pots are more weight-efficient
for general hauling, but barrels are absolutely required for (for
example) dyer's shops and asheries, so it's good to have a few lying
around. In the stockpile menu, set a
[reserve](http://dwarffortresswiki.org/index.php/Using_bins_and_barrels#Reserving_containers_for_other_tasks "wikilink")
of about ten barrels; this will set them aside for those purposes - or
brewing. That means if your supply of stone pots runs low (as it often
does in the early fort), your barrels may *still* all get used for
brewing, and you'll need to construct extra when you build an ashery or
dyer's shop anyway, but any dwarf would agree that at least they went to
a good cause.

Make about ten bins for immediate storage. We'll make more later, but
will get a few other odds and ends out of the way first. Next, if you
have any fruit or nut trees on the map (and most nice embarks do), make
a couple of stepladders for your herbalist to take a-gathering. A few
splints, crutches, and buckets will also (inevitably, unfortunately)
come in handy for treating injuries and moving water around. Finally,
set bins and cages on repeat until those stockpiles are full, and
monitor the levels. A fortress requires a staggering quantity of storage
bins, and cage traps are so ridiculously effective that for this guide -
again, making things easy for ourselves - they'll constitute the
majority of our defences until we have a sufficiently formidable
military.

After that, it's tempting to prepare hundreds of beds and shields ahead
of time for when your fortress needs them, but I think at this point
it's more important to get as many logs on the ground as possible, so
send your woodcutter/carpenter on a non-stop tree massacre. Since trees
are renewable, you shouldn't harbour any concerns about extirpating all
the apple trees and missing out on delicious cider (and there should be
enough other plants for your herbalist to gather that you won't be
reliant on fruit and nuts from trees). Plenty of time for that later -
the [elves](http://dwarffortresswiki.org/index.php/Diplomat#Elven_Diplomats "wikilink") haven't heard of your
fortress yet, so make the most of it…