This first section of the strategy guide covers world generation, site
and civilisation choice, provisioning and skill allotment.

Worldgen, Site and Civ Choice
-----------------------------

This step is rather straightforward, and well-covered in the wiki.
First, read the article on basic [World
Generation](World_Generation "wikilink"). Then, create your world, using
the following settings:

  World size   History   Number of Civilisations   Maximum Number of Sites   Number of Beasts   Natural Savagery   Mineral Occurrence
  ------------ --------- ------------------------- ------------------------- ------------------ ------------------ --------------------
  Small        Short     High                      Medium                    Medium             Medium             Frequent

This should result in a well-balanced mix of challenge (hostile
civilisations, beasts, savage animals) and opportunity (minerals,
trading civilisations) for the beginning player. The world should also
generate and the game run fairly fast on a variety of machines; note
that these aspects of performance tend to degrade exponentially with
world size and complexity.

You may wish to consult the [Map legend](Map_legend "wikilink") to
understand the result a bit better. When you're done, hit to save the
world and return to the main menu.

Now that your world is done baking you could, if you desired, dive right
in with [Dwarf fortress mode](Dwarf_fortress_mode "wikilink"). However,
I prefer to learn a bit more about the various dwarven civilisations
before I choose one to play. If you'd like to do the same, you want some
third-party tools (otherwise skip a section).

Examining the World
-------------------

Install [DFhack](Utility:DFHack "wikilink"), and then [Legends
Viewer](http://www.bay12forums.com/smf/index.php?topic=154617.0). Follow
the instructions to get Legends Viewer working - it's fairly
straightforward and easy to use.

The initial page should show some summary statistics about the various
civilisations. Pick a dwarven civilisation you like the sound of, and
which has a middling to high number of citizens (five hundred is
probably a good minimum, to ensure you get caravans and migrants). Click
on that civilisation and you'll be taken to more information about them.
Continue to explore different civilisations and their stories - tragic
or heroic rulers, battles, lost fortresses and so on - until you've
settled on one. I like to choose a civilisation I can build a story
around, and which gives my fortress a purpose - strengthening a frontier
against aggressors, for example, or expanding territory, or whatever.
Then go back into Dwarf Fortress and start fortress mode. Be aware that
choosing a civilisation with active [conflicts](War "wikilink")
increases your dosage of vitamin [F](Fun "wikilink"). And even if your
civilisation is not at war after worldgen, wars often begin in the short
[burn-in time](World_activities#Advancing_time "wikilink") before
starting your fortress, and also soon after you begin playing. The first
caravan often brings quite dire news.

I should note here that DFHack starts automatically alongside Dwarf
Fortress, but for the rest of this guide I'll assume you're not using
any third-party applications. It's easy to switch DFHack off - just
rename “SDL.dll” (which actually came from your DFHack install) to
something like “SDL\_dfhack.dll” and then rename “SDLreal.dll” to
“SDL.dll”. Reversing this process turns DFHack on again.

Choosing a site
---------------

Once you're ready to choose a civilisation, read some
[advice](Embark "wikilink") on [Choosing a Good
Site](Quickstart_guide#Choosing_a_Good_Site "wikilink"). It's worth
taking your time with this! There are a lot of important considerations.
You want it not too [dangerous](Surroundings "wikilink"), useful
[temperature, flora and fauna](Biome "wikilink") (especially trees),
flowing water [of some kind](River "wikilink"), [fair
expectation](Civilisation#Dead_and_Struggling_Civilizations "wikilink")
of caravans and migrants, no [aquifer](Aquifer "wikilink") (useful but
compelx/dangerous), all the [metals](Ore "wikilink") and
[flux](Flux "wikilink") you could desire, a few layers of
[soil](Stone_layers#Soil "wikilink"), and ideally also some sand and
clay. It's also worth [checking](Embark#Changing_Views "wikilink") your
proximity to your own civilisation, trading partners, and potential
belligerents (in particular, maybe avoid necromancer towers for now).